---
title: "GitHub and the C-suite social"
date: 2014-04-07
description: Much like we pooh-poohed Twitter in those early days, GitHub, in its early crawl, is today dismissed simply as a tool for the diehard developer. However, as with any tool with great potential, innovators find new ways to leverage emerging technology to communicate, and government chief information and technology officers can effectively do this with GitHub.
author: GovFresh
---

<p dir="ltr"><span style="line-height:1.5em;">In the early days of Twitter, it was easy and common to dismiss the infant social network as a simplistic tool that served a whimsical and nerdy niche.</span></p>
<p dir="ltr">Today, Twitter has gone from the technorati tweeting hipster conference minutiae to a platform driving the new world digital order. This didn’t happen overnight. But, when the flock of civic technologists set flight, the social government migration happened quickly and collectively.</p>
<p dir="ltr">Much like we pooh-poohed Twitter in those early days, GitHub, in its early crawl, is today dismissed simply as a tool for the diehard developer. However, as with any tool with great potential, innovators find new ways to leverage emerging technology to communicate, and government chief information and technology officers can effectively do this with GitHub.</p>
<p dir="ltr">There’s the obvious use case, such as contributing code and commenting on projects, much like Veterans Affairs Chief Technology Officer Marina Martin does via <a href="https://github.com/MarinaMartin">her GitHub account</a>. It’s probably asking a lot for the C-suite to dive deep into code on a daily basis, there are other, more conversational ways GitHub can be leveraged.</p>
<p dir="ltr">Case in point, a few weeks ago, Federal Communications Commission Chief Information Officer David Bray and I had a Twitter exchange about the utility of GitHub. Immediately, I created a repository (think “folder”) on my <a href="https://github.com/lukefretwell">personal account</a>, and set up a new “<a href="https://github.com/lukefretwell/fcc-cio-chat/issues/2">What questions do you have for FCC CIO David Bray?</a>” issue (think “discussion”).</p>
<p dir="ltr">To Bray’s credit, and perhaps surprise of his public affairs office, he humored me by immediately <a href="https://github.com/empower-your-coders">joining GitHub</a>, posting replies to a number of questions about FCC open data, open source, cloud hosting and web operations. Over the course of an hour, there was a genuine, real-time conversation between a federal CIO and the community at large.</p>
<p dir="ltr">Despite wide adoption of social tools by public sector innovators, most of the C-suite remains decidedly analog in terms of engagement and sharing of relevant information about the inner workings of our public sector institutions. A cursory survey of government chief information and technology officers shows they abstain altogether or, when they do, generally give random personal updates or staid posts with a heavily-sanitized public affairs filter.</p>
<p dir="ltr">The emergence of GitHub may change this for the government technologist, especially those willing to engage fellow coders and citizens on projects in an open, fluid environment.</p>
<p dir="ltr">Former Presidential Innovation Fellow and current GitHub government lead Ben Balter has since followed suit and created a government-focused “<a href="https://github.com/government/ask-me-anything">Ask Me (Almost) Anything</a>” repo featuring Q&amp;As with Philadelphia Chief Data Officer <a href="https://github.com/government/ask-me-anything/issues/1">Mark Headd</a> and staff from the newly-minted <a href="https://github.com/government/ask-me-anything/issues/4">18F</a>.</p>
<p dir="ltr">GitHub’s repo and issues features are natural communication tools for C-level technologists who fancy themselves innovators leveraging emerging tech in new, creative ways.</p>
<p dir="ltr">For the IT C-suite, the <a href="https://github.com/govfresh/gitchat">GitChat</a> is the new Twitter Townhall, a way to instantly and directly connect with peers and the general public and be asked anything.</p>
<p dir="ltr">Well, almost anything.</p>
